Philadelphia and Washington DC. Why was that so
parallel? Well that was lousy weather that winter
and the Air Corps airplanes weren't equipped with
good instruments for instruments for instrument
flying. It had no radio aids to tell them when they
were on the course and they no de-ices on the
airplanes and these poor They were told to take
this mail from here to there and busted right
through night and day and nothing, regardless of
weather weather. That's no way to stay alive. I got
out there to Pittsburgh. The first 60 hours I was
out there, I was on duty for 52 hours. I got eight
hours sleep out of 60. There was another fella out
there named Shulgin, and if the weather was
doubtful, I'd tell the pilot, go into the hotel in
Keysport and get some sleep. I'd put this damn mail
on the train. So I'd have a little post office out
there at the airport. I'd tell the postmaster,
send it into town, put it on the train. put the
airplane in the hangar, wait for some good
weather. The next day, if the weather was decent, I
had the pilot to take the plane on back to where I got
it. I stopped all killing out there. I didn't
expedite the air mail particularly, but I kept
losing good piloting equipment. Sure. Hell with
the business of getting it through.
You thought that this idea of getting it through at
any cost was foolish? I thought that
the youngster named Shulgin was out there, and he
was, I guess, afraid to do anything. Jones, B.Q.
Jones, knew I would
dare to do anything that was necessary, to hell
with the higher-ups, including Roosevelt. And so
he sent me out there and I stopped the killing.
What did the postman think about this? Were they
upset because it took longer now? No. Post Office
Authority, they didn't worry about it.
There's one, I'll show you how bad it was. It was a
little fighter plane, P-12. Got no, just barely
room for the pilot. There's a little place back at
the pilot where he can put his bags, clothing bags.
We come and land in there with mail sacks stacked
around the engine, stacked around the cockpit,
stuff full back here. and so damn cold that it got
down to 22 below zero that winter. It was so cold
that before we could get that airplane, the mail
sacks off, the engine was so cold that we couldn't
get it started again. So, the pilot goes into the
hotel to run the airplane down into the United
hangar, I believe, had a hangar there. United
Airlines are very nice to us there, very
cooperative. Put the airplane down there and get
it heated up to where we can get it started again the
next morning. That's the kind of equipment we had
to carry mail. The only instruments in a P-12,
that's a pursuit airplane, they call them fighter
planes nowadays, was the necessary instruments
to fly in good weather.
You know, they had a banking turn, you could fly in
bad weather, but no de-ices on it at all. Playing
ice, getting iced up, down here to
go. It was a fiasco. It did help us get some good
equipment later though. Because the government
realized that you were not as well prepared as you
should have been? Yeah. When people, young
actually get started getting killed you know and
losing aircraft and newspapers pick it up and they
want to know why of course naturally and then the
senators and the representatives start noticing
things and then you get some action. Sure. Up till
then we could yell our heads off and they'd pay no
attention to us. Right.
How long were you there? I was there until May,
sometime in May. I finally got back to Boston. May
of 37? No, May of 34 this was. We started flying the
mail January of 34 and we flew it to May of 34 and then
turned it back to the airlines. And I got back to
Boston airport. I'd been gone seven months on
temporary duty. And when I got back to Boston
Airport, I asked Washington to transfer me out of
that National Guard squadron over to the reserve
detachment that was there on the same airport,
where I could at least have something to do. And so I
got over with the reserve, but I still didn't like
living in Boston. Why not? Oh, I don't like the
weather. I didn't care for the people,
particularly. Not my kind
of people. What do you mean by that? I don't know.
I just don't seem to think the way I do, and I can't
explain that either, because you don't know
whether you like somebody or you don't like them.
Here in Del Rio, for instance, we made more friends
than we would make in Boston if I lived there 50
years.
I wouldn't try to explain it. Did they assign you to
the National Guard or anything? I went to the
reserves and then I put in to go to Panama in January
of 1935.
my friend in the Chief of Air Force office.
Personnel got me signed to Panama. Went down there
in February of 1935. And by this time you were a
captain. I was a captain at that time and then they
started temporary promotions. We finally got
away from the single list and they started The Air
Force, Air Corps, got permission from the powers
that be to make temporary promotions. Well, why is
that? Why do you think? Well, here I was, I was 19,
35, 18. That's 17 years. 16
years as a lieutenant and a year as a captain. and I
was doing major work. I was assigned the
commanding officer of the pursuit squadron in
Panama the minute I got there. That was a major's
job, so why not make me a major?
Why should we all always be submerged like that?
So it started as temporary. promotion. Funny
thing, in May I was a lieutenant and I went to
captain as 34. And February
35, ten months, nine months later, I'm a major, a
temporary major. And for some reason they
canceled out the temporary business and put me
back to captain for about a week, and then I went
back to a major. They couldn't make up their mind. I
had something wrong. Then I went to lieutenant
colonel in 37, so there's a... So you went to three
grades in three years. I can show you even worse. I
was 16 years a lieutenant, one year a captain in
1935. In 1943, I was the burglary general, so
that's how fast I went up after they got off this
single list.
Did that, getting off the single list and going to
the new system of temporary appointments, did
that lift morale? Yeah, it helped.
In 1937, I went to the Command General Staff
School, which is an Army school in Fort
Leavenworth. But tell me a little bit about
Panama. What did you think about being down in
Panama in the 1930s? Oh, I loved it. The weather was
fine. We worked from 7 until noon, and then I had to
play polo and got off. I got to lead several
flights. I led a flight down, headed for Peru one
time with a flight of Pursuits, BW-12, Pursuit
planes there. I got down in Columbia, ran into foul
weather and I was afraid of losing.
That's just why it would be refreshing, I think.
Go ahead, son, honey.
I'm going to rush you all out to go to lunch about
11.30. 11.30? I'm about to lose my voice.
You know, this is wine. I don't know if you're on a
wagon or not. No, no, no, this is fine. I got out in
Cali, Columbia. I figured on landing farther down
in Columbia on a beach called Tumaco Beach to gas up
for the last leg in Guayaquil, Ecuador and the
Colombian government decided it was too
dangerous to allow us to land on Tumaco Beach and
So, I took the flight down another 100 kilometers
to a place called Los Rios and filled up every tank,
you know, right to the top and started for the
Guayaquil and got out over the ocean and ran into a
wall of water and, you know, P-12, the same one that
tell me about flying air mail in. Not equipped to
fight that kind of weather. We could fly and we
could fly on instruments, but here's the Andes
Mountains going up to 30,000 feet over here on land
and here's the Pacific Ocean with it raining like
hell.
I'm gonna lose some airplanes and pilots here, but
I don't go back, so I just turned around and went
back into Cali, Columbia, and we spent the night
there. And you didn't lose anybody? I didn't lose
anybody, but I didn't get to Peru, not with that
kind of equipment, and I let a flight up to
Nicaragua one time. It was a civilian pilot. named
Kingsley, who was flying from Managua to the mines
that were on the northern part of the country. He
had a Ford tri-motor.
And he went down somewhere in the vast forest
between Managua and the mines. And General
Somoza, who was president, about Nicaragua. I
asked Panama to send a flight up there to help find
him. So I took about eight, I was put in charge of the
flight, about eight or nine airplanes. We went up
to Managua and searched that area but You couldn't
see, like looking for a needle in a haystack. Sure.
I remember one time. It was jungle too, wasn't it?
Yeah, just a big jungle. You can't see down, you
can't see anything. I remember in Panama, I saw a
pilot jump out of an airplane right next to the
canal. I saw exactly where the plane went in. I flew
immediately over there. to look to see what the
plane was and I couldn't never find it. I knew
exactly where it was and I couldn't see it. It's
like, what... It's a lot of possible. While we were
there, this fellow, Kingsley's brother is
searching and he gets lost. He goes down, so
there's two Kingsley brothers, both Americans,
lost in that jungle. I never did find them. Samosa
had us all up at the palace and thanked us and the
cocktail party. Did they die? Oh, they were gone,
yeah. They never did mine. So you lost one out of
your crew? No, no. No, Kingsley, Kingsley's
brother went down. No, I didn't lose any of mine.
All good. I got them all back to Panama. And what'd
you think of Samosa? Oh, I liked him. He was a West
Point graduate.
I met his son,
who was the one that was run out recently and was
murdered down in Paraguay.
I liked him, the family. How'd they treat you,
American Flyers? They just treated us fine. They
were, well Samosa was very much concerned that
these two American Kingsley brothers were lost,
but he did the best he could. He had eight of us up
there, eight airplanes from Panama looking for
him. It was an impossible job.
We used to
fly up and down Central America. Goodwill
flights. Oh, really? During the mid-thirties?
Yeah, 35 or 37. During Roosevelt's good neighbor
policy.
Yeah. For us, it was just good training and having a
good time when we got there. Did the government Did
the government of the United States give you any
instructions? Or did they just say be friendly?
Well, the first thing I'd do is call on the local
ambassador, the American ambassador. He'd
probably be out there to meet us at the airport, you
know. And then we'd go to a cocktail party that
night and dinner. property, embassy, put it on
board or something. Maybe the local chamber of
commerce
or somebody. We had a good time. Did your Spanish
improve? Did I what? Spanish improve? Did your
Spanish improve? Oh, yeah. I got to where I did
after a couple of drinks. I'm losing my tongue. I
bust right into Spanish. Do you think that the
attempt to increase friendly relations between
the United States and Central America, was it
successful? Well, I think we did some good. Maybe
not as much as we thought we were, but I think we were
certainly welcome. You were? Yeah. Was there any,
was there ever any anti-American feeling that you
felt? Never. Never a bit.
So they were happy to have you, Flyers, as their
guest? They were happy to have us come into the
country and make a little excitement for them, you
know. Sure. Did you put on any air shows like the Air
Force did today? No, no, we didn't put on any air
shows for them. but the feeling at that time was
very friendly to Americans in all of those
countries. In Managua, for instance, they took us
up one time to where they have a coffee tasting, a
coffee wholesale outfit that grades coffee. They
have a big round table that revolves and they have a
coffee expert sitting around this table and each
has a little cup and in each cup is a little sample of
coffee and so they sit there and pick it off the
table and they slurp it up so it hits the roof of
their mouth and then quickly spit it out so it
doesn't touch their tongue because if it touches
their tongue that would spoil the taste for the
next one. So they slurped it up, hit the roof of the
mountain, and spit it out. The tables moved
around, and other cups in front of them. That's the
way they grade coffee. Actually, that was
interesting for you. That was very interesting
for me. How often did you go on these flights, these
goodwill flights? Oh, I think we would manage
about every two months, something like that. And
usually to a different country? And did you go to
all the countries in Latin America? Yeah. We
usually went all the way up to Guatemala. We didn't
make Mexico, but we'd go up to Guatemala City. And
one time I took a flight over to Salvador. El
Salvador. We never did stop in Honduras, because I
think they were unfriendly to us at that time, but
Costa Rica was very friendly, and there's so many
Englishmen in Costa Rica, Americans, they speak
English mostly everywhere, and they were very
friendly to us, and the other direction towards
South America, we never got very far. That flight I
took to Columbia was the only flight we ever made to
South America. Why didn't you go further to South
America? I don't know. With
our equipment, we couldn't get to Peru. So that
left If we were on the other side, we could probably
get to Venezuela by landing at Guadalajara, a port
just outside of Caracas. We could probably get
that far. We might have gotten to Georgetown or
British Guiana. most of the niggers there, so not
much point.
And I think they were going communist at the time.
Columbia, we got to Cali, but Bogota, I don't know
if our planes would have done so well at that
altitude at about five or six thousand feet. So you
didn't want a chance then? Going north,
everything was fine. Was your main mission in
Panama to guard the canals on them? Yeah. We were
part of the American Army down there. We were very
spit and polish, inspection every Saturday.
I was commanding one pursuit squad on the 31st and
I'd take them up every morning and teach dog
fighting, simulated dog fighting and things like
that. Did you ever lose any pilots? We lost a few
pilots.
We lost a pilot on cross-country from, night
cross-country from
the north part of the canal zone back to Albrook,
from Fransfield to Albrook. And this pilot man
just dove into the ground, dove into the swamp,
killed he and his mechanic. How'd you get along
with the Panamanian people? They liked their
money. They liked their money. They had
a lot of saloon and things like that in Panama.
Americans would come down there, and they had a
union, what they called a union club, and we used to
go quite often to have parties there in the union
club, and dance half the night, and drink, and
spend lots of money
in there. I'm trying to think
of the name of that. Was there ever any Did you feel
ever that there was some anti-Americanism? No.
None whatever. I belong to the Panama Golf Club.
I've done it in Panama. I played with Panamanians
and a lot of Americans belong to it. American
civilians. An American civilian is pro
and We just got along beautifully, correct?
Correct. What did you think about the recent
treaty which gave the Panama Canal... That's one
of the worst things Carter did, I think. I just
don't, I just can't understand
it. That's something Carter put over. He was very
anxious to do it. And I think one of our Texas
senators voted for it. I think Benson voted for it.
Like that. I don't understand why we should give it
away. I think it was tragic. Of course, Russia's
trying to cut off our communication. If they can
get their hands on the Panama Canal, I severed
their communication between west coast and east
coast for a Navy, except to go clear out Cape Horn.
And they're
trying to close off the Suez Canal by getting into
Haley
Selassie's country. Ethiopia. Ethiopia. and
also on the other side in Yemen, South Yemen, Yemen
I guess, where they can flood that off in case of
war. Makes ships go clear out in case of good hope.
Of course, that cuts the communications for your
Navy ships. So you think that was a bad move? I think
it was a bad move. I think it was instigated by the
Communists in Russia. Mr. Tornadio fell right in
for it because he wants to be the dictator there. He
was a dictator in
fact. I think it was Communist inspired.
When did you leave Panama? I left there in 1937 and
went to the command general staff school, where
the brass hats go. Sure, what did you think of that?
Well, when I left Panama they painted one of those
helmets they wear in the tropics, they painted
brass. So they presented me with that when I got on
the ship. I liked nine months at Fort Leavenworth,
but I wasn't crazy about it. But I got through quite
easily. Played indoor polo there until I got
injured.
I got along okay with the ground officers. Was it a
good learning experience? Good what? Learning
experience? I don't know, not learning anything
that did me any good. They were fighting the Civil
War over
it. They had these map problems, how you'd get
across a stream, you know, where would you put your
troops, this, that, and the other. They called it
map problems, once a week. I used to, you had from
one till five on Fridays to do them. And I'd wrap it
up at about 3 o'clock and turn my paper in and I got
satisfactory on all of them. But the rest, most
every other officer would stay there and take the
full five hours, figuring the longer he took, the
better his solution would be. Well, I decided I'd
try that sometime. So when I had the paper all
finished about 3 o'clock, I said well I'll take the
other two hours and I'll go over this again. So I
went through it again and I changed my mind about
where I would put my troops and where I would attack
from and how I would do it you know. Turned it in at 5
o'clock and I got a U which meant unsatisfactory.
So from then on to hell with that. But basically you
thought that the school was fighting the past
wars, and do you think it was behind times as far as
being up to date on modern military tactics? Ah,
mostly. They did introduce, we had some Air Force,
Air Corps instructors there too, and they had what
they called a vertical envelopment. where you
drop troops back in the lines, you know,
and secure the river crossing or whatever. But
very little of it. Mostly ground stuff. Fighting
battles in the Civil War, which they should have
been fought. And perhaps some battles over in
Europe that During World War I? They were fighting
some of the World War I battles over here? Yeah,
refighting over here. You don't sound very
enthused about this school. I wasn't very
enthusiastic about it, no. It was supposed, this
school was supposed to educate you for
advancement into the general officer corps.
Yeah, advance. Did you think it was worthwhile?
I don't think it's worthwhile for an Air Force
officer, no. Do you think the school helped your
career? Yeah. Okay, it's time for you two to go
workshop, and then we'll get some lunch. Well,
let's go to the back. This area is my good area. I
wonder if you can move that chair. Okay, we're
finishing, or we finished on Panama, and then Your
next assignment in 1938, you were sent to
Wright-Patterson as a technical, in the
technical inspection branch. Yeah. Now what were
the major problems that needed inspection at that
time, do you remember? At that time, they had three
technical, what they called technical
supervisors, who traveled twice a year to every
Air Force base. to make sure that the Air Force Base
had all technical orders published by
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base and that they
were following them out. So they were. And that
they were keeping their aircraft and other
machineries in good shape. And that's what we were
inspecting. I had with me a Master Sergeant who was
a very technical man, and he would check the
technical order files and help me look over the
aircraft and firefighting equipment, etc. Sure.
You were making sure that people were maintaining
the airplanes properly.
Yeah. I was on that duty until the war started. And
then my boss in Washington, Barney Giles, called
me up and said, you were coming in here to take my
place. I'm going to move up next to General Arnold.
And so I became chief of technical inspection for
the entire Air Force. Right. Now at
Wright-Patterson, before we moved to
Washington, at Wright-Patterson, were there Any
major problems with the aircraft? Anything that
you know? No, no, they are just a question of
maintenance. They are right. Patterson
furnished me an airplane for myself. Sergeant and
I to get around in and they maintained it. I had it
ready to go on or if it wasn't ready, they'd have
another airplane for me to take. And they were very
cooperative. I was working, of course, directly
under the Chief of Air Force. Wright-Patterson
had nothing to do with me except that they
maintained my airplane and they gave me office
space. That's the only thing they had to do with me.
Now when you moved to Washington D.C. as the Chief
of Technical Inspection for the Air Force, right
after Pearl Harbor,
and right after the war started, what were the
major problems to get the Army Air Corps ready for
the war? My worst problem was finding good
technical inspectors to place in various places
with the various air forces and to find airplanes
for them to get around in. Because there was a
shortage of airplanes. A shortage of staff
airplanes. And I went out and I got permission to go
out and buy up any civilian aircraft that I thought
would be useful for my inspectors to get around in.
And I went over to the
Civil Aeronautics Bureau and enlisted all the
technical inspectors they would let me have.
which was some help to me. They were all civilians?
Yes, civilians, inspected. And were they pretty
good? Yeah, they knew the work, yes. They were well
qualified. And so in this job, did you travel all
over the country inspecting the quality of the Air
Force? Yes, I was on the go quite a bit, sometimes by
civilian aircraft. Sometimes I could pick up an
Air Force plane bowling field and get by myself.
One trip out to Anaheim, California that I made in
an Air Force plane, B.C. 6. When I came back into
Washington, the weather was foul and airplanes
were stacked up. The civilian airlines had
airplanes stacked up over the field there waiting
their turns to get in, but the controller at the
Washington airport
gave the bowling field controller
in charge, gave him the
responsibility of getting me on the ground where
bowling, talking me down, you know. So I got into
bowling all right. Did you, were you able to solve
the problem of a shortage of aircraft and
inspectors while you were the chief? No, I was only
in that job about nine months. I was trying to get
out of it the minute I got in it. Why didn't you like
that job? I just didn't like to be close to the
throne for one thing, that General Arnold Every
time there was a crack up and somebody was killed, I
was on the carpet. Why? What causes them? I told
him, but I told him, you are not giving the students
enough time before you commission them and give
them an airplane. You ought to extend each primary
flying...
basic flying and advanced flying. Each stage
should have one extra week of training before
these youngsters are put in an aircraft on their
own. Well, General Arnold, he had the newspapers
on his neck all the time. Roosevelt went, hurry up,
hurry up, hurry up. And so I wasn't able to put that
across.
He expected me to go out and find out what caused
these wrecks and correct it. Well, I couldn't do
it. And you kept telling him it was because they
weren't trained well enough. That's absolutely
what I told him. And so I got pretty sick of that. How
did you like General Arnold? I liked him all right.
I had other generals I liked better. Why? Well,
General Arnold had his ear... trained on the White
House, Roosevelt, was talking into his ear and the
newspapers were on Roosevelt's neck, I guess, and
also on Arnold's neck about these crack-ups. And
if I'd been Arnold, I would have told him to shut up
and go to hell or do something. But instead of that,
what he tried to make me, the goat, getting these
things, these accidents stopped. There was no
such way I could do it. So you think he passed the
buck too much to you? Well, he had just, he had a hell
of a job, you know, at the start of the war. I don't, I
can't blame him. Okay.
You also know another person, and that was General
Jeremy Doolittle, what did you think of him? I
think he was probably the best Air Force general we
had, really, during the war. No kidding. Why do you
say that? He was just a natural born leader. He
could do anything he asked his men to do and do it
better. And he just, he was, men loved to work for
him. They loved to be under him. I enjoyed my stay
with him very much.
He was my type of officer and the main thing is to
give a man a job and don't be looking over his
shoulder while he's doing it. Give him the
responsibility of the job and if he doesn't do it,
we'll find out why and if it happens again, we'll
boot him out and get somebody else. Well that's
what, that's Jimmy Doolittle all the way. And
that's the type of leader you were? Well yeah, I
tried to be that way. In July of 1942, you took an
inspection trip, I'll get it right, inspection
trip to England. And what were you inspecting? You
mentioned this in your memoirs, but you don't
explain. I was inspecting the various bases for
technical
supervision,
technical, how they were getting along from the
technical standpoint. That was my job. Were there
RAF, Royal Air Force bases? No, they were all
American bases. There was Newfoundland, and
there was Labrador. and two bases in Greenland.
One was called BW-1 and one was called BW-8. I never
found out what the BW stood for. But one was at the
southern tip of Greenland and one was up the west
coast of Greenland about a couple hundred
kilometers, I guess, up the west coast, up above
the Arctic Circle. And up there they
had Colonel Bert Balken, who was a native of
Norway, was up there with the dog team and sleds to
go out on the ice cap with Newt and Greenland and
rescue any crews that went down on the ice cap. And
he was a man for the job. He did a fine job on that. Did
he rescue people? Yeah, he rescued, I don't think
we, I don't recall that we ever lost a crew
permanently on that ice cap. I think we rescued all
of them. Great. What were the conditions when you
did this inspection in July 1942? What were the
conditions? Very excellent. Excellent.
Excellent. Well, that was pretty quick.
Everybody amazed me. It was in July when the war
started in December. Just six months of May, I had
everything working like clockwork. No kidding.
That's outstanding. I did an outstanding job.
Now, as you say, you were an inspection, chief of
the inspection for just about nine months, and
then you volunteered more or less for North
Africa. Yes, I got a hold of Jimmy Doolittle and in
the corridors there of the munitions building and
I told him I wanted to get to England in this war. I
said, I spent the last war in this country as a
flying instructor and it looks like I'm stuck in
Washington here for this one and I want to get out.
And he said, well, have you got somebody to take
your place? And I said, yeah, I got somebody. He
said, all right, I'll put in for you. And that's the
way it happened. And so he took you on. Yeah. And
exactly, what was your... Well, the first week I
was over in England the 12th Air Force had not been
formed yet completely. The 8th Air Force was in
England and he signed me to the 8th Air Force as
Inspector General and I spent a week going around
various bases in England to look over how the
Americans were doing from a technical
standpoint. and then about a week or ten days while
the 12th Air Force was formed for the invasion of
Africa with General Doolittle as commanding
general, and I was assigned to the A-4 section,
which is supply and maintenance. Okay, so by this
time you were a lieutenant colonel, or were you
promoted now to colonel? I was a colonel, I think.
Okay, colonel and... I just don't know exactly
when I was promoted from lieutenant colonel to
colonel. Okay, colonel and the 12th. Yeah. And
Dulo was the general and commanding officer.
Yeah. And how many colonels did he have on his
staff? I don't know, but he had General Dunton, who
was my immediate boss. General Dunton was A-4 in
charge of supply and maintenance. And General
Dunton had myself and two other colonels to head up
three different sections under him.